As an African woman,
I often find that my life
is about confronting
a single story of some form or other.
So when TED asked me to come and speak
about feeding a lot of people,
the one thing I was sure about
was that I was not going to rehash
stories of poverty, misery
or hunger in Africa.
But the more I thought about it,
the more I realized that it would be like
walking in here and finding an elephant
and not acknowledging it.
In some cultures, that might even be rude.
So, I'd like to start
by sharing an image
that might be familiar to many of you.
That is a BBC picture of Michael Buerk
reporting from Ethiopia
on the 1984 famine
which shook the conscience of the world,
even in Africa.
That BBC broadcast
brought into our living rooms
the face and the scale
of human catastrophe in Africa,
and even though it was
taken exactly 30 years ago
this month,
it is still the way many
people view Africa,
as a continent that's desperate,
that's helpless, that's hungry.
This is a less familiar picture,
but it is a picture of a
typical Ghanaian farmer.
She said to say hello.
And next to her is a box
of delightful Belgian chocolates.
To me, even though this picture is more recent,
it is also a more enduring picture.
It could easily be 20,
30 or even 50 years old.
It is the picture of the lopsided terms of trade
in agriculture.
It is also the picture
of untapped potential and
unequal opportunity all at once.
Now, if my American nieces
and nephews were here,
they would say, "Auntie Sipho,
what does the farmer have to
do with a box of chocolates?"
Because, like most people's
nieces and nephews,
they think chicken comes
from the supermarket,
chocolate comes from a box.
But the reality is that
that box of chocolates
could not exist without the farmer,
and yet the farmer continues to take home
literally a raw deal every day.
So, why don't I put that into perspective?
Today, the chocolate industry
is valued at 110 billion dollars —
and remember, they get 70 percent
of their cocoa from West Africa.
But yet, while the chocolate industry
is in the parlor counting all its billions,
the farmers downstream in the value chain
are in the garden
struggling to feed their families.
So this, you are thinking,
must be the story of cocoa
farmers in West Africa.
Well, it's not just the story of
cocoa farmers in West Africa.
This is the story
of all kinds of farmers all across Africa,
breaking their backs
and getting the short end
of the value chain stick,
and as far as I'm concerned,
the main cause of that is policy failure,
policy failures that affect everything
from productivity to infrastructure
to the terms of trade.
This is a placeholder for a picture
that hasn't yet been taken,
so just help me to
imagine a future picture,
a picture that will be taken
maybe 30 years from now,
a picture of a thriving Africa,
an Africa that's not just feeding itself,
but an Africa that's helping
to feed the world,
driven by its agriculture productivity,
by its agriculture transformation.
Specifically, think about an Africa
that's able to feed the world.
This is an exciting picture for me,
and the reason this picture is exciting
is because it is possible.
I just talked about the policy failures
that need to be addressed,
but I would like you to hold
that positive image of an
Africa feeding the world,
because today
there are seven billion
people on the planet.
We've heard throughout this week
that by 2050 there
will be 10 billion of us,
10 billion people on the planet.
That has implications
for dinnertime, surely.
So the question is,
how are we going to
feed 10 billion mouths?
From everything we know,
there is no answer to that question
that does not involve Africa.
Let me explain.
We're going to need land,
we're going to need water
and we're going to need people.
Here are the facts:
60 percent of the world's
remaining arable land
is in Africa;
Africa's water resources
are the least tapped in the whole world;
and Africa, already the
youngest continent,
will soon have the largest
and the youngest workforce.
So you see where I'm going with this.
And even before we get
to the uncultivated land,
there is so much potential
to get much more from the land
that is already under cultivation.
So what's the holdup, you might be asking.
Let me paint a picture for you
of how African farmers
have to work and produce food
and feed those of us on the continent.
They're working with an incredible combination
of little to no fertilizer,
tired seeds,
and — get this — prebiblical tools.
Not biblical tools.
You all remember that in biblical times,
almost everyone had
at least half a dozen yoke of oxen
drawing their plows.
African farmers, no, they don't have that.
They work with hoes, picks and cutlasses,
and these tools predate biblical times.
So that's a picture that's
going to have to change.
What is amazing is that they're able
to produce anything at all,
much less the 80 percent of the food
that is consumed on the African continent.
Imagine if African farmers did not
have to deal with unfriendly policies.
Imagine if they didn't have to worry
about unaffordable credit,
if they didn't have to
worry about the threat
of climate change,
degraded soils,
bad roads in the rainy season
that turn to mud so that their produce
is waiting at the roadside
spoiling while waiting to get to market.
But this is exactly what
African farmers have to do,
and in order to feed
the 10 billion people that
I talked about in 2050,
that's a picture that will have to change.
There is a long way to go
and the challenges are
definitely enormous,
but for every challenge,
there's an even greater opportunity,
and that's what I'd
like to talk about now.
How is Africa going to go
from meeting its needs
to creating wealth?
So essentially, for Africa to
go from meeting its needs
to creating its wealth,
I think we need to change the model.
We need to change how we do agriculture.
So I think it's clear by now
that I'm not just talking
about subsistence farming.
I am talking about farming with
a large scale or a small scale,
but farming as an enterprise.
I am also talking about agribusiness.
Okay, I see the investors in the room,
they are starting to lean forward.
So let's take a success story: Brazil.
It took Brazil just about 30 years
to transform itself
from a net food importer
to the world's top exporter
of beef, of poultry, tropical fruits,
sugar cane, you name it.
All over the world,
people see stickers on their food
that say "Grown in Brazil."
And even in Africa, where I come from,
if there's a chicken at the dinner table,
chances are it's a Brazilian chicken.
So imagine a few years from now,
walking into your local grocery store
and picking up a bag of potatoes
that says "Grown in Nigeria,"
or buying that fine box of chocolates
from a Ghanaian chocolatier.
That's the image that we need to see,
and that picture is not too far away.
And if you don't believe me,
talk to the economists
over at the African Development Bank.
They say by 2030,
Africa's food market will be worth
one trillion dollars.
But, there's a catch to that:
if and only if the policies are right.
That means the farmers have access
to affordable credit,
if the infrastructure is in place —
that means the roads,
the railways, the electricity,
the irrigation, the technology,
and that means we break
down the trade barriers
and improve the terms of trade.
Essentially, all of these
policy interventions
should seek to attract
private sector investors
in agriculture.
That's how we're going to help
to feed the 10 billion people
on the planet by 2050.
So, for all of this to happen,
it is important that the policies are right.
It is important that we change the way we see,
support, and manage agriculture,
and if all of those things happen,
it is not a stretch, again,
to imagine Brazilian chickens
being replaced by Malawian chickens.
The reality is that if governments
keep their promises,
put more budget into agriculture,
help the farmers who
already feed us to thrive,
that is what will change
the image of agriculture
and help Africa to feed the world.
I think for young people who
are thinking about a career,
who are thinking about
business opportunities,
it is important for them, and for us,
to begin to see agriculture
the same way that Godiva and Nestle
see the chocolate industry:
as a profitable sector.
The way that investors,
like Aliko Dangote —
he's only the richest
black person in the world.
It had actually never occurred to me that
anyone was richer than Oprah, but —
(Laughter) (Applause) —
He has just bet his wealth on agriculture.
He's recently announced
a $1 billion investment
into Nigerian commercial rice farming.
So that's how we need to
see agriculture in Africa.
In fact, for Dangote,
agriculture is no different
than oil is for ExxonMobil.
That's how much value
he sees in agriculture,
and that's the image
that we need to project
to the investors, to the young people,
because that is the future of agriculture.
I would like to just end
with a personal story,
because I think it is clear that Africa
has an opportunity, given
everything we know,
to not only transform as a continent,
but it has an opportunity
to help feed the world,
and, more importantly,
to change the picture
forever and for good.
On a personal note,
I grew up in Zambia,
where my family was
exiled during the struggle
for the liberation of Zimbabwe.
Both my parents had grown up on the land,
and they were lucky enough to have parents
who invested in their education
so that they could escape the rural areas.
And all they wanted for
us, as their children,
was a better life.
They knew the life of a farmer.
They knew what it meant
to live one crop failure
away from a disaster,
and for me, they wanted me to be a doctor,
maybe a lawyer or an engineer,
anything but a farmer.
So it must have been some relief for them
when I went off to university.
Even though I went and studied something
as dismal as economics,
at least it wasn't farming.
But the real surprise
was when my life went full circle,
and I literally came back to my roots
and used my education as an economist
to advocate for agriculture.
Because for me, I see it very differently.
Agriculture is not a dead end.
That sector that they
prayed I would escape,
that's the sector I'm
working hard for now,
because I see agriculture
not only as the future of Africa,
but it is the future of all of us.
Thank you.
(Applause)